---
id: 202504251501
slug: a-spirit-of-purpose
title: A Spirit of Purpose
date: 1975-04-20
year: 1975
type: speech
archiveReference: Box 1, Pepperdine University Speeches Collection
collectionId: 202504251508
transcribedBy: Sam Perrin
transcriptionDate: 2025-04-25
---
“A Spirit of Purpose” is a speech delivered by Pepperdine president [[William S. Banowsky]] at the [[Dedication of Seaver College]] on April 20, 1975. It is probably best regarded as a sequel to Banowsky’s earlier speech [[A Spirit of Place]].

## Text
> # "A SPIRIT OF PURPOSE"
>
> The Address
> of
> DR. WILLIAM S. BANOWSKY
> President, Pepperdine University
>
> at the Dedication of
> FRANK R. SEAVER COLLEGE
> April 20, 1975
>
> These remarks, delivered on April 20, 1975, at the dedication ceremonies for Frank R. Seaver College, Pepperdine University's new Liberal Arts College at Malibu, are published as a statement of the philosophy of the University.
>PUBLISHED BY PEPPERDINE UNIVERSITY, APRIL, 1975
>
> ## "A SPIRIT OF PURPOSE" 
> We are assembled here as participants in the making of history. Forty years ago, [[George Pepperdine|George]] and [[Helen Pepperdine]] established a small college on a 33-acre campus at the edge of Los Angeles. Today, the Pepperdine dream has grown into a multi-campus university enrolling almost 8,000 students in several colleges and professional schools. In coming years, we shall doubtless witness formal dedication of other academic components which, taken together, comprise the University—the [[Caruso School of Law|School of Law]], the [[Graziadio Business School|School of Business and Management]], the Graduate School, the [[School of Education]], perhaps even a School of Theology, of Public Administration, of Behavioral Science. These several parts will be a university, a unified whole under the Pepperdine banner, because each will reflect, in its own best way, the Pepperdine philosophy of Christian Education.
>
> Today, we are convened to dedicate the first such school to be fully established since Pepperdine achieved university status in 1971. This college has already become the cornerstone of the University. The central core of the whole academic enterprise, it is the classic undergraduate college around which the professional and graduate schools of the University will be clustered. From this day forward, it shall be known as the Frank R. Seaver College.
>
> Even as the University enrollment expands into the thousands, Frank R. Seaver College will remain small. Its maximum enrollment will be 1800. The academic integrity and special identity of Seaver College will be fiercely guarded. Its curriculum will be the sciences, arts, and letters. It will feature close personal relationships between faculty and students. The Seaver College faculty are men and women of the highest academic training. They are devoted primarily to the ministry of teaching, since Seaver College is essentially a teaching, as opposed to a research, institution. The students at Seaver College are extremely bright. For instance, the Scholastic Achievement Tests for the founding freshman class here in 1972 were 200 points higher than the usual pattern throughout Pepperdine's entire history. Young people will enroll in Seaver College as full-time students. Along with academic excellence, they will maintain the highest standards of personal conduct. Rather than commuting in and out for classes, most will live on this beautiful campus. Frank R. Seaver College will, above all else, make a deep, indelible impact upon the minds and hearts of its students.
>
> Created by [[William Pereira|William L. Pereira]], the facilities of Seaver College are two-thirds completed. With construction of a fine arts center, an [[Smothers Theatre|auditorium]], an [[Thornton Administrative Center|administration building]], and additional housing for both married and single students as well as for faculty, an ideally designed liberal arts, coeducational, undergraduate, residential campus for 1800 students will be accomplished.
>
> Along with the land required for the Seaver College campus, we have been extremely fortunate in acquiring a total of 650 acres of this magnificent Malibu coastline. Our property stretches from Pacific Coast Highway to the pinnacle of the Santa Monica Mountains and beyond. This enables us to consolidate other University schools in these hills, each with its own identity and autonomy, without any crowding or erosion of the rugged natural beauty. But as Pepperdine University develops at Malibu, the crown jewel in this blending of mountain and ocean and sky, and the academic heart of the entire University, will always be Seaver College.
>
> George Pepperdine, who launched the dream, and [[Frank R. Seaver]], who gave it dramatic acceleration, were contemporaries. They were acquainted during the time Mr. Pepperdine was expanding his [[Western Auto Supply Agency|Western Auto Supply]] Stores and Mr. Seaver was creating his great [[Hydril Co.|Hydril Company]]. Rugged individualists, inventive, long-range thinkers, astute businessmen—they were cut from the same stout cloth. Both were deeply patriotic Americans. They were profoundly Christian. Both believed that the best investment for the future was to provide a value-centered education for young people. Both were devoted husbands who shared their lives and their philanthropy with the two remarkable women who grace our presence today.
>
> Mr. Seaver, son of a pioneering California family, graduated in 1905 from [[Pomona College]], an institution of similar type to this one which now bears his name along the Malibu. His alma mater was one of the formative forces of his life. What Pomona College did for Frank Seaver is what Seaver College hopes to accomplish in the lives of young people across the decades to come. Augmenting his strong family training, Pomona College taught him integrity, discipline, self-responsibility, hard work, thrift. He left college with a sense of purpose in life and great faith in God. For Frank Seaver, the most important college experience was the regular Chapel service. When Frank Seaver succeeded in business, in an act of profound obligation, he gave back to his alma mater the monumental Seaver Science Center. By the time of his passing in 1964, Mr. Seaver had helped many institutions, including a small college called Pepperdine, whom he included among the beneficiaries of his last will and testament.
>
> The surest evidence of Frank Seaver's remarkable good judgment was exhibited on September 16, 1916, when, in the North Shore Church in Chicago, he was married to [[Blanche Seaver|Blanche Ellen Theodora Ebert]]. The tenth child of a loving couple who had immigrated from Bergen, Norway, Blanche was the perfect partner for Frank Seaver. She gave up her promising musical career to make her life one with his. Together, they have perhaps contributed as generously to the cause of independent education as any family in the history of California. In addition to many gifts at Pomona, we believe Mrs. Seaver is the most generous donor in the history of the [[USC|University of Southern California]]. There are Seaver buildings at [[Loyola Marymount University|Loyola University]], Rockford College, Freedom's Foundation at Valley Forge, the Harvard School, the Pilgrim School, along with support to Don Bosco Technical Institute and Claremont Men's College.
>
> Some lives can best be characterized by biographical details, but Blanche Seaver's is not one of those. The biography is, of course, impressive: composer of more than two dozen original musical compositions, including the internationally loved prayer, "[[Just for Today]]"; *Los Angeles Times* Woman of the Year; member of ten Boards of Trustees, including Pomona College, the University of Southern California, the Hollywood Bowl, the Music Center, the Los Angeles Philharmonic and Children's Hospital; and holder of six honorary doctor's degrees.
>
> But knowing these facts about an important public figure is not the same as knowing Blanche. One of the private stories I now is that long ago, as a little girl, Blanche was allowed to assist in her father's paint and supply store. What she relished most was tailor cutting the pieces of glass which were ordered by her father's customers. What she is proudest of is that she never broke even one piece of glass. She was so dependable that she got to use her father's diamond-point glass cutter. "Bill," she recently said to me, "please don't let them call me a philanthropist! I hate that word. I don't feel the least bit like a philanthropist. I just feel like a little glass cutter." It is Blanche Seaver's essential purity of heart, not these external credentials, which makes her character worthy of emulation. She embodies qualities of spirit and mind to which we hope young people in this college will always be pointed. Given the circumstances of wealth and ceremony which have surrounded her life, it is a tribute to her that she has remained such a natural, unaffected person.
> 
> Mrs. Seaver has a tremendous capacity for love, a great appreciation of beauty. She is capable of dignity and decency which are the finest tradition of Western civilization. She is a tireless worker with a voracious zest for life, and she is a person of transparent sincerity. As we all know, Blanche is not a shrinking violet who leaves us in doubt about her convictions. What is most important, she has the courage of her convictions. She not only stands up and speaks out when it is popular to do so, but is just as militant when she is a minority of one. Long ago she adopted for her life the stirring motto of Father James Keller: "What *one* person can do!"
> 
> [[Ronald Reagan|Governor Reagan]], our distinguished speaker today, will forgive me if I share with a story known only to him and Blanche and me. On a Sunday afternoon in the winter of 1972, I took Blanche to the Governor's Pacific Palisades residence to get his help. For reason of conscience, Blanche had chosen for the first time in her life to bolt the political party she and Mr. Seaver had encouraged for decades. Although most of her life-long friends were doing so, she was absolutely refusing to serve as an honorary delegate to the National Convention. My only concern was that it could eventually prove awkward to her to isolate herself in this way, but I had failed to make any headway whatsoever. Accordingly, I sought reinforcement from Governor Reagan. I can only say that after two hours of very persuasive arguments, Blanche replied to the Governor: "Ron, I know I may be the only one who feels this way, but I must live with my conscience." When the slate of honorary delegates, including most of the distinguished Republican leaders in California was drawn, Blanche Seaver's name was conspicuous by its absence. In retrospect, her conscientious stand seems not an embarrassment, but a compliment. And she had stood up against a couple of pretty persuasive guys that she liked a lot.
> 
> I should add a special word about her capacity for loyalty. So fierce is her loyalty that [[Richard Seaver]] once observed wryly, "Aunt Blanche's enemies have no virtues, but her friends have no vices." Her great patriotism is really a product of her deep loyalty. So is her continuing devotion to Frank Seaver. He died in October, 1964. For more than a decade, Mrs. Seaver has executed her work in his name and every Sunday afternoon, week after week and year after year, she has visited his grave at Forest Lawn.
> 
> Underlying all of these qualities is a fundamental spirituality. Leaders of religion—Dr. [[James Fifield|James W. Fifield]], [[Rabbi Magnin]], [[James Francis McIntyre|Cardinal McIntyre]]—are the most intimate friends at the center of her life. An incredibly non-materialistic philosophy of life has been the basis for her generosity. She knows that life does not consist in the abundance of possessions. She not only has neither a cottage in Carmel nor a home in Palm Springs, but she and Mr. Seaver have never even owned their family residence. She still rents the mellow old house at [[20 Chester Place]]. She wears no jewelry, neglects her wardrobe, appears for the annual banquets year after year in the same familiar gowns.
> 
> Her joy is not in getting but in giving, and I have never met a person who gets more joy out of giving. Not just big buildings, but a bouquet of roses for a wedding anniversary, a candygram at Christmastime, Vitamin C tablets to her friends with the sniffles, a bottle of wheat germ for those who look anemic—always, the simple contagious joy of giving and giving and giving again.
>
> It has taken great faith and boldness to give away these many millions. We can name others who have been as materially blessed, but most people are more materialistic than Blanche. They lack the courage to give away those material things which define their very security. It is enormously inspiring to me that Blanche Seaver has never defined her security in material terms, and, for that reason, she is profoundly secure.
> 
> Mrs. Seaver clearly knows the difference between this brick and mortar and the soul of the college. Five years ago, on May 23, 1970, as we broke the first ground for Seaver College, we pledged "to bring together on these hills a community of scholars who hold distinctive spiritual beliefs." Our purpose in this College is primarily spiritual. Mr. Pepperdine was a lifelong member of the Church of Christ, and our continuing relationship with this religious group creates the core of our spiritual stance. Hence, unlike the pattern of most church-related institutions, in this era of expansion we seek to strengthen even further the ties with our own brethren.
> 
> As we keep Christian values at the heart of the whole educational process, we will resist any sectarian spirit. We shall encourage full and open academic inquiry. We shall not pose as an institution which knows all truth. What we affirm is that while our vision of truth is limited, ultimate truth actually exists. We affirm that the universe is undergirded by an objective moral order. We will continue to keep pace with change; but our main purpose, in this place, will be to discover what is not changing. And our central conviction will be that Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today and forever.
> 
> What we do here today, then, is of permanent importance. Perhaps no other institution of human creation is of such enduring quality as an institution of higher learning. Even nations and civilizations rise and fall while universities and colleges survive. Among the oldest continuing human creations are the great universities at Paris, Oxford and Cambridge which stretch back across the centuries to the 1100s. [[Harvard|Harvard University]] was established in 1636, 140 years before the founding of the United States of America. During World War II when most of Germany was leveled by allied artillery, not one bomb was dropped on the beautiful city of Heidelberg because of its university. We believe that Seaver College of Pepperdine University will serve young people for centuries to come.
> 
> In 1938, George Pepperdine chose as the [[Pepperdine motto|motto of this university]] a verse of scripture: "Freely ye received, freely give." (Matthew 10:8). No person has more powerfully lived that truth than Blanche Ellen Theodora Ebert Seaver. Her middle name, Theodora, is my favorite. Of Greek derivation, it means, "the gift of God." I believe it is by the providence of God that Mrs. Seaver was brought into our lives.
> 
> Therefore, on this 20th day of April, 1975: By authority of the Board of Trustees of Pepperdine University, I do hereby proclaim this the [[Seaver College|Frank R. Seaver College]], dedicating it for all time to come to the glory of God and the service of mankind.