---
id: 202504281033
slug: pepperdine-university's-relationship-to-churches-of-christ
title: Pepperdine University's Relationship to Churches of Christ
year: 1978
type: essay
archiveReference: Box 3, Shirley Roper papers
collectionId: 202504281034
transcribedBy: Sam Perrin
transcriptionDate: 2024-11-01
---
“Pepperdine University’s Relationship to Churches of Christ” is an essay summarizing the nature of Pepperdine’s relationship with the Churches of Christ. It is unsigned and undated, but I suspect it was written by president [[William S. Banowsky]]. References in the text allow us to assign it a date between July 1977 and April 1978.

>PEPPERDINE UNIVERSITY’S RELATIONSHIP TO CHURCHES OF CHRIST
>Since its founding in 1937, Pepperdine University has maintained an [[Pepperdine and the Churches of Christ|affiliation with the Churches of Christ]]. This religious body has no structure or hierarchy beyond that of each individual congregation. Each congregation is a separate self-governing entity which elects its own leaders who are not responsible to any higher authority within the Churches of Christ. Further, there are no meetings, conferences, or other gatherings or representatives of Churches of Christ for the purpose of passing resolutions, writing creeds or statements of belief, or in any other manner working to express the views of the Churches of Christ so as to be binding on others. There are no such meetings in any local community, any state, or any nation. Each congregation is independent.
>
>The above facts notwithstanding, Churches of Christ maintain a vigorous and active fellowship in the United States and around the world. A wide range of educational and social services are provided, such as schools, colleges and universities, orphanages, homes for unwed mothers, and homes for the aged. If the maintenance of any of these services requires an organization other than a local congregation, the institution is established under its own board of directors. Various individuals and congregations may then contribute as they see fit, but there is no denominational machinery to compel such contributions.
>
>Among the institutions of higher education maintained by members of Churches of Christ are the following:
>
>  [[Abilene Christian University]], Abilene, Texas
>  [[Lipscomb University|David Lipscomb College]], Nashville, Tennessee
>  [[Freed-Hardeman|Freed–Hardeman College]], Henderson, Tennessee
>  [[Harding University|Harding College]], Searcy, Arkansas
>  [[Faulkner University|Alabama Christian College]], Montgomery, Alabama
>  [[Northeastern Christian College]], Villanova, Pennsylvania
>  [[York College]], York, Nebraska
>  [[Rochester University|Michigan Christian College]], Rochester, Michigan
>  [[Columbia Christian College]], Portland, Oregon
>  [[Oklahoma Christian University|Oklahoma Christian College]], Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
>  
>Each of these institutions is organized along lines very similar to Pepperdine University in that each operates under its own board of directors. in the same way that the individual congregations maintain fellowship with each other, they maintain relations with these schools, as the schools do with each other. The important principle is that the association is entirely voluntary and that there is no general corporate structure that can claim at any one time to speak for everybody else. The independence of each congregation and of each school, orphanage, or whatever, is a cardinal religious tenet of the Churches of Christ. The doctrinal basis for this is that authority belongs only to God and not to organizations of people.
>
>It is highly significant that Churches of Christ do not themselves maintain theological seminaries, and therefore colleges such as those named above have traditionally filled a leading role in training missionaries, ministers, and other church workers. Approximately 1,400 missionaries from Churches of Christ are serving around the world with the support of local congregations in the United States. The majority of these received their training in one or the other of such schools as those listed above. Most of the ministers who are serving the numerous Churches of Christ around the nation also received their training in such schools.
>
>Without attempting to be exhaustive or definitive, following are some of the indications of the relationship that Pepperdine University has with Churches of Christ:
>1. The [[Articles of Incorporation]] of the University require that “at least sixty percent (60%) of the actual number of members serving shall be members of the Church of Christ.” (Article VI.) The Articles further specify that upon the liquidation or winding-up of the corporation of Pepperdine University, its assets shall be distributed either to nonprofit educational and religious purposes as specified by the Board, or in default of such determination, “to the Churches of Christ.” (Article VIII.)
>2. The [[Bylaws]] of the University require: “A majority of the members of the Executive Committee shall be members of the Church of Christ.” (p. 4.)
>3. In keeping with the Articles of Incorporation, The Bylaws state: “In view of those distinctive characteristics of the University which are attributable to the relationship it enjoys with Churches of Christ, at least sixty percent (60%) of the actual number of Regents serving shall be members of the Church of Christ.”  (p. 5.) At the present time, there are forty Regents, of whom twenty-four are members of the Church of Christ.
>4. The Bylaws provide for a standing committee, known as the [[Religious Standards Committee]], to which is delegated full and exclusive authority to regulate spiritual and religious programs such as chapel assembly, religion courses, faculty and staff selection, standards for campus life and conduct, special convocations and lectureships “to insure a continuing and meaningful relationship with the Churches of Christ,” and to select the person to fill any vacancy in the Office of President. (p. 12.)
>5. The Bylaws provide that “the Chairman of the Board of Regents shall be a member of the Church of Christ.” (p. 21.)
>6. Numerous bulletins, brochures, and catalogs published by the University assert either its church relationship or its Christian mission and emphasis. It is characteristic both of Churches of Christ and of Pepperdine University to affirm a nonsectarian approach to Christianity and to assert independence of ecclesiastical control.
>7. The legal notices inserted in our catalogs indicate the seriousness of our concerns about religion in such statements as the following: “Pepperdine University does not discriminate on the basis of sex except where necessitated by specific religious tenets held by the affiliated religious body.”
>8. The student handbook for Seaver College, which is the liberal arts college of the University and which is, therefore, responsible for training the younger students of the University, lists various activities that are distinctive of a church-related institution. Among these is the Wednesday convocation, required of every student. This convocation, commonly known as chapel, “is a visible unifying experience for affirming the University’s founding base of faith through corporate worship and programs stimulating spiritual development.” The requirement to attend chapel is a long-standing traditional part of church-related institutions in the United States. The student handbook further states that “worship programs each Sunday and during the week are sponsored on or near the campus by members of the Churches of Christ, whose plea is for nondenominational New Testament Christianity.” Campus rules regarding conduct and discipline are those one would expect to find in a church-related institution, with reference to such matters as gambling, drinking, smoking, personal appearance, prohibition of dancing on campus, and avoidance of coeducational housing.
>9. All but one of the seven executive officers of the University are members of the Church of Christ. Church members include the following:
>	Dr. [[William S. Banowsky]], President
>	Dr. [[Howard A. White]], Executive Vice President
>	Mr. [[Warren Dillard|Warren M. Dillard]], Senior Vice President--Finance
>	Dr. [[John Nicks|John D. Nicks]], Jr., Vice President for Academic Affairs
>	Dr. [[Bob Thomas|Robert H. Thomas]], Vice President for Administrative Affairs
>	Dr. [[James Wilburn|James R. Wilburn]], Vice President for University Affairs
>  Of twenty-one additional general administrative officers of the University, all but two are members of the Church of Christ. The faculty of Seaver College, where the University expects to have its greatest impact in fulfilling its religious commitment, has a total of seventy-three members, forty-three of whom are members of the Church of Christ, for a percentage of 58.9 percent. The University total of 226 faculty members numbers seventy-eight members of the Church of Christ, which is 34.5 percent of the total.
>10. The Pepperdine University policy of nondiscrimination and program of affirmative action contains the following statement: “The free exercise of religion guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States includes the right to establish and maintain religious educational institutions. Pepperdine University is chartered as a Christian institution, its founder having provided that the school maintain a special relationship with the Churches of Christ. Federal guidelines clearly recognize the right of a church-related institution to seek personnel who will support the goals of the institution, including the right to give preference in hiring and promotion of faculty and staff to members of the church to which the institution is related (Section VI-1.5 of Federal Executive Order 11246 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964). Therefore, the University will continue to give such preference to members of the Churches of Christ and also to others whose lives exhibit respect for and support of the goals of Christian education. Except for these special concerns, it is the established policy of Pepperdine University to select the most qualified persons available for University positions without regard to race, color, religious creed, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap, age, sex, or prior military service.”
>11. The official statement for a bond issue authorized by the California Educational Facilities Authority of July 29, 1977, contains the following statement: “Since its inception, the University has maintained a continuing affiliation with the Churches of Christ. This Protestant body is comprised of a loosely related group of independent congregations and does not have either a centralized hierarchy or an official statement of doctrinal principles. Notwithstanding the University’s affiliation with the Churches of Christ, persons of all religious persuasion are welcome at the University as members of the student body and faculty.”
>12. With the possible exception of the visit of Gerald R. Ford in September, 1975, the largest gathering of any kind in the history of Pepperdine University has been in connection with the annual [[Pepperdine Bible Lectures|Bible Lectureships]] that are planned explicitly for the Churches of Christ, and whose speakers are almost altogether ministers of the Churches of Christ. The largest gathering of the members of the Churches of Christ west of the Rocky Mountains are these lectureships that are held annually by Pepperdine University. The Lectureship for 1978 will begin on April 16, when it is expected that more than 5,000 members of the Churches of Christ will gather in the Firestone Fieldhouse to hear Dr. [[Ira North]], prominent minister from Nashville, Tennessee and former member of the Pepperdine University Board of Regents.
>13. The University maintains a department of Church Relations headed by Dr. [[Carl Mitchell]], who is also the Chairman of the [[Religion and philosophy division|Religion Division]]. Quite a number of activities are held under his direction each year, including a Thanksgiving Youth Christian fellowship, a workshop for preachers and elders, and sessions for religious counselors. Also included under Dr. Mitchell’s direction is the annual tour of the Pepperdine University A Cappella Chorus, which during the current year will visit a number of Churches of Christ in our region. (A copy of the itinerary is attached.)
>14. The Associated Women of Pepperdine is the support group composed of women who are members of the Churches of Christ in various parts of California. For many years this group has functioned as an auxiliary for service in the University and has contributed a total of well over a million dollars to the University. This group maintains a scholarship fund which is restricted to members of the Churches of Christ, and the amount of scholarships given to students during the current year is approximately $45,000.
>15. The University is very concerned about its relationship with Churches of Christ. During the current academic year, President William S. Banowsky has made numerous preaching and visiting trips to various churches to discuss the work of the University and to encourage attendance at the spring Bible Lectureship.
>16. A leading advisory group for the University is the [[Chancellor's Council|Chancellor’s Council]], composed entirely of members of Churches of Christ and most of whose members are ministers. This Council meets on a regular basis with the Chancellor to discuss ways and means of promoting effective relationships between the University and the Church.
>17. To a very high degree, Pepperdine University meets the standard of church-relatedness published in a study headed by Merrimon Cuninggim, President of Salem College, which study was sponsored by the National Council of Churches, with assistance from the Ford Foundation. (A copy is attached.)