---
id: 202504281146
slug: ronald-reagan-speech-delivered-at-seaver-dedication
title: Ronald Reagan speech delivered at Seaver Dedication
date: 1975-04-20
year: 1975
type: speech
authors:
  - Ronald Reagan
archiveReference: Box 2, Seaver papers
collectionId: 202504281148
transcribedBy: Sam Perrin
transcriptionDate: 2025-04-02
lastUpdated: 2025-06-01
---
This is the text of a speech delivered by former California governor [[Ronald Reagan]], at the [[Dedication of Seaver College]] on April 20, 1975.

>Text of Ronald Reagan speech delivered at Seaver Dedication, April 20, 1975.
>
>[[Blanche Seaver|Mrs. Seaver]], [[M. Norvel Young|Dr. Young]], [[William S. Banowsky|Dr. Banowsky]], members of the Administration, the faculty, the [[Board of Trustees|Board]], Friends of Pepperdine and students who might be here: After listening to all of those credits in that introduction, I’m not quite sure just what role I’m playing here today. I have no placards with me; I will not ask you to get up and march. On hearing that I was reminded of a very great team that was in the American theatre for many, many years. They would not only play on Broadway in the great theatres there, but tour the country on many occasions. At one point, experienced as they were, there was a blow-up in lines. They couldn’t remember and the prompter in the wings whispered the line. They edged their way, ad-libbing, over closer because they couldn’t hear. They got closer and they still couldn’t hear. Finally he said the line so loud that even the audience could hear it and with that the star turned and said, “We know the line, which one of us says it?”
>
>As you know, it is a pleasure to be here in this most beautiful setting and when I think of students here, laboring and toiling to get an education in this particular setting, if Dr. Banowsky will forgive me, I am reminded of a visit I made some years ago to an industrial plant in the middlewest \[*sic*\]. It was of a newer type that had bee made similar to a campus, surrounded by beauty, with a beautiful grove of trees. Walking across this campus-like place, I said to the manager of the plant, how many work here? And he said “Roughly half.”
>
>Now, you all have been reminded of my interest in higher education a number of times in the last eight years. Sometimes I wish you hadn’t been, but seriously, I am interested in education, particularly in the preservation of our traditional, independent school and college type of education. I think it is our greatest guarantee of academic freedom. And I have seen nothing in these last eight years that didn’t strengthen my convictions that we must preserve it at all costs. I think the small intimate campus, if it disappears, some day we may find that while I have great respect for the great public educational institutions in our country and know the necessity for them, but without this particular type of school, we may find ourselves some day reduced to giant behemoth campuses that are literally assembly-line diploma mills.
>
>I have been interested to note in the last several weeks that some members of the University of California are beginning to refer to me as the spendthrift governor. But I am honored and delighted to be here and particularly on this occasion. In a world that seems to be in so much turmoil when old and valued traditions are being challenged that haven’t been challenged since the cynics of ancient Rome raised their scornful voices, there is a special joy in seeing a new college come into being: a place where the values that have been tested by time will be passed along to generations yet unborn. What is being dedicated today was made possible in large measure by the genius, the work, the thrift, and the unselfishness of a man who used to call himself just a plain old duffer who kept his nose to the grindstone. Some duffer!! [[Frank R. Seaver]] left his mark, and a good mark it was on American Industry, on aviation, on Los Angeles County, on California, and on the future. And he had a partner. A life-long partner in his work, his life and his love. And that partner is with us here today -- [[Blanche Seaver]]. Because of her and her willingness to carry on the great humanitarianism which characterized their partnership, we dedicate this college today. It is the latest in a dozen of \[*sic*\] so educational institutions, science centers and buildings on California campuses. All have been brought about and contributed by this partnership, so devoted to service. Now, if Frank were here, he’d be embarrased \[*sic*\] by now. He was modest, unassuming, a gentleman who shunned the spotlight. His interest was not in collecting accolades but in making it possible for others to grow and expand and thus extend the cycle of benefits of this American dream. The Seaver gifts were given with no strings attached. Once Frank and Blanche determined that a project merited their support, they also determined that it was of sufficient integrity to seek its own course. One of the very few times when Blanche did make a request involving a gift, it had to do with another building at another university. She was convinced that the architects had made the doors -- well, they weren’t expensive enough. She said “The doors should be open. They should be wide and free so that people could enter in.” And so, the door was redesigned.
>
>Frank was pretty much of a self-taught attorney. He was admitted to the bar before he went to the [[Harvard]] Law School -- which doesn’t cause me any unhappiness at all. He was an inventor, even though he was never an engineer. He was a generous and compassionate employer and he was a smart business man \[*sic*\]. Twenty years ago, back in the late ‘40s, when very few autos were equipped with air conditioning, Frank had it installed in the cars driven by his [[Hydril Co.]] salesmen. And when in the dead of summer they were up around Bakersfield and Taft and those other places and they would drop by they would find plenty of oil workers waiting for that air conditioned car to climb in and of course a little business was done at the same time.
>
>He had another love which he shared with Blanche. It was a love for government by free men. He was on the first board of free-voters of Los Angeles County, and back in 1912 he played an important role in writing this County’s first charter. And a significant 46 years later when they got around to re-writing the County Charter to bring it up to date in 1958, he was appointed as a member of the revision committee. After 8 months of study the commission decided that it could not improve on the original charter and adjourned with the recommendation that the citizens leave it the way it is. I think it is no exaggeration to say that some of the wisdom, some of the thinking of the founding fathers who wrote the Declaration of Independence was manifest in his own wisdom and the works of Frank R. Seaver.
>
>The other part of the Seaver equation, this gentle woman who is with us here today, the youngest of ten children, has received so many honors in her lifetime that together with her husband, has given so much to so many young men and women the opportunity in particular that she never had -- to get a college education. She serves on the Boards of Trustees of colleges and universities, she is the recipient of the Jane Addams metal for distinguished service twice, she is a member of boards of countless hospitals and orphanages and nurseries -- all bench marks in a lifetime of service. One of her accomplishments, one of many in her multi-faceted life, on which might come as a surprise to some of you if you hadn’t read the program very carefully, is that all told she has had some 20 songs published. And one of them will be sung for us here today. It was first recorded years ago by [[John McCormack|John McCormick]]. It is entitled “[[Just for Today]].” “Lord, for tomorrow and its needs I do not pray, Let me both diligently work and pray, Let me be kind in word and deed, Just for today. Keep me, guide and love me Lord, Just for today.” And so from this, these lives of diligence and love and prayer has come this liberal arts college. How will it serve? Not just as a university in this golden state. How will it serve mankind? A university is not simply a vending machine which dispenses pre-packaged knowledge. It must also be a repository and distribution center for a certain kind of wisdom. We stand in awe as man encapsulates some of his species and sends them speeding through space to land on the moon. We are amazed as man probes the inner universe and discovers molecular structures which are indespensible \[*sic*\] in understanding the physical life process. The computer science has promised whole new worlds of processing and transmitting information. The potential good for all mankind is enormous. But such developments can be thwarted, neutralized, and even turned against us if we don’t match them with significant and perhaps even greater social advances. The scriptures warn that though we have this power to move mountains and have the knowledge to understand all mysteries, without love we have nothing. We wait with more than idle curiosity to learn some day if there’s intelligent life on some other planet. And at times we wonder if there is intelligent life on earth. You know, it was never a part of the American dream that we evolve into a robot society run by computers, centralized thought and values and action. It was not what the Boston tea party was all about or Valley Forge or Appomattox. And we’d better match our technological advances with social understanding of the dynamics of free men, so that the machines and the energies and the data banks bring not only material well being, but more important a greater personal freedom, more versatility, unfettered skills, incentive and creativity in living. Perhaps I’m presumptive but also I exhort those who teach and those who learn, who research and apply, to couple their work with reason and conscience and heart. It will be at such seats of learning as this that the balance between the solid state of matter and the inner state of man would be redressed. It is most appropriate that Blanche and Frank Seaver have contributed furthering research in great science centers which they have provided, enriching the technological side of our society. It is equally appropriate today that in her partner’s name Blanche Seaver has made it possible for this institution to be devoted to the humanities. There is a belief that we’re creatures of the spirit born with a God-given right to be recognized, not as faceless ciphers but as individuals with dignity and freedom to choose. Many voices today are raised challenging such beliefs. With great inconsistency they march under a banner of so called liberalism while they strive ceaselessly for social reforms that are totally materialistic with no thought of what they might be doing, if they succeed, to the spirit of man. Lacking faith in the people they would substitute rule and regulation for the free rhythm of the marketplace and they do so in the sincere belief that they are benefitting mankind. But if they had their way, we will one day live in a society where everything that isn’t compulsary \[*sic*\] is prohibited.
>
>[[John Kenneth Galbraith|John Kenneth Galbreath]], who in my opinion is living proof that economics is an inexact science, has authored a new book, entitled “Economics and the Public Purpose”. He asserts that the market arrangements of our economic system have given us inadequate housing, terrible mass-transit, poor health care and a host of other miseries, all of which have to do with the material side of man. And then finally, he comes out for the first time to my knowledge from behind the white shield of liberalism and tells us that only socialism can solve the problems that beset us. He deals in fairy tales. Why is it so impossible for some to abandon theory, and hold up instead for a practical comparison, the two great examples that we have in the world today of two different ways of life. There is another nation greater in territory than our own, rich in natural resources, populated with some 250 million capable people. They have had more than a half a century to fully implement and put into practice socialism. And we could be just like them. But it would take a little doing on our part. We’d have to cut our paychecks by 80 percent, and move 33 million workers back to the farm, destroy 59 million television sets, tear up 14 out of 15 miles of highway, junk 19 out of 20 automobiles, tear up two-thirds of our railroad track, rip out nine tenths of our telephones, tear down 15 percent of our houses and then all we’d have to do is find a capitalist country willing to sell us wheat on credit so we wouldn’t starve.
>
>By contrast, look what has been done in a single lifetime here in this blessed land. My own lifetime. I’ve already lived, thanks to the research and the development, most of it privately subsidized in health, I’ve lived ten years longer than my life expectancy when I was born. A source of annoyance to a number of people. When I was born, 90 percent of the people lived below what we call the poverty line and two-thirds lived in substandard housing. Today, both figures are less than10 percent. 95 percent of all the people in our land have the minimum daily intake of nutrients essential to maintain health, 99 percent of our homes have gas or electric appliances, 96 percent have television sets, and we own 120 million automobiles and trucks, all of which will be down on the Coast Highway when you leave here today. But that’s on the material side. on another side, we have had time to become truly the most generous people on earth. We’ve shared our wealth more widely than any society heretofore known to man. We have more churches and libraries, we support with voluntary contributions more institutions like this, more symphonies, more operas, more non-profit theatres, and publish more books than all the rest of the world put together. One third of the young people in the world getting a college education are getting it in the United States, and we have more doctors and hospitals in proportion to population than any other nation.
>
>Back many, many years ago before this nation came into being, on the deck of the tiny Arabella off the wind-swept coast of Massachusetts, John Winthrop gathered the little band of Pilgrims there on the deck of the ship and he told them before they landed what it would be like. He said “We shall be as a city upon a hill,” but he said, “If we betray our God and do not fulfill his destiny for us we shall become a by-word for thousands of years for all mankind.”
>
>Well, today, because two Americans believe so strongly in [[Pepperdine and the American Way|this unique way of ours]], we have the Frank R. Seaver College of Liberal Arts as part of a University which itself exists because others shared that same devotion to that same dream and that dream is our heritage if we have the courage to keep it.
>
>Thank you.
>
>mb