---
id: 202504301424
slug: white-to-file-1974-05-18
title: White to file, 1974-05-18
date: 1974-05-18
year: 1974
type: memo
authors:
  - Howard A. White
archiveReference: Church Relation, May 1974 file, Box 63, Howard A. White papers
collectionId: 202504281112
transcribedBy: Sam Perrin
transcriptionDate: 2024-10-08
lastUpdated: 2025-04-30
---
This is a memo to file, written by Pepperdine executive vice president Howard A. White, dated May 18, 1974. In the memo, White gives an update on the ongoing [[Trent Devenney affair]].

>May 18, 1974
>Every day, including Saturday, is such a busy day for me that I have not found time to devote to keeping these notes up to date. Today I shall summarize some of the important developments since I last wrote for this account of Pepperdine's struggle to define its purpose.
>
>On March 21 [[M. Norvel Young|Dr. Young]] sent me a copy of some correspondence between [[William S. Banowsky|Bill]] and some of his best friends concerning [[Pepperdine and the Churches of Christ|Pepperdine's identification with Churches of Christ]]. It is interesting that although they are all "liberals" within the brotherhood context, all agree that the school needs identification with a particular religious body. Bill professes to accept their conclusions as valid, but he also seeks from time to time to do specific things that would completely alienate Pepperdine from the church constituency. My opinion is that Bill at this point in his life does not know what he believes about anything, and that he would prefer to see Pepperdine become secular, but of course with a high moral tone. In my opinion, Bill is not only ecumenical with reference to Christianity, but is much more liberal than any of his friends to whom he addressed his question about Pepperdine's direction. About three years ago he asked me in the [[8039 Vermont Ave|"tower" office]] in Los Angeles why we could not just be like [[Claremont Colleges|Claremont College]]. He more recently sought to appease the Jewish extremists in Malibu who objected to having a cross on our tower, and only allowed it to remain when Dr. Young refused to consent to its removal. And only yesterday Dr. Young told me that Bill recently remarked that he sees no need to work for what is going to happen to Pepperdine anyway--meaing \[*sic*\] its ultimate secularization.
>
>[[Frank Pack]], [[Tony Ash]], and [[Don Williams]] discern in varying degrees just where Bill wants us to go, and all strongly object to the direction, even talking of resiging \[*sic*\] or engaging is \[*sic*\] some kind of concerted movement to change direction to a more xoncervative \[*sic*\] stance than we now have. But Dr. Young must continue to work with Bill, for he is the key to keeping [[Blanche Seaver|Mrs. Seaver]] happy, and we cannot surive \[*sic*\] without her help. If she lives until October, 1974, there is a chance her trust will be made irrevocable, and also that Pepperdine would get much more money than at present when federal laws would force much of her estate to go for inheritance taxes on the ground that her will was made in ancicipation \[*sic*\] of death. My hope is that she will live a long time, for she is a woman of great integrity although I disagree with many of her views, and that Pepperdine will ultimately not be under such a financial necessity to accept Bill's leadership.
>
>It is very necessary that Dr. Young remains alive and in firm control or Bill will secularize us overnight. Dr. Young has had trouble with his heart, but told me yesterday that a sophisticated and complete test indicates he has nothing to worry about from his heart is \[*sic; recte:* if\] he will be reasonable in the amount of strain he endures.
>
>He also told me yesterday that Bill is talking about taking a leave of absence to work on a Ph.D. in philosophy at [[USC]] and letting Dr. Young and me run the University. Bill has already talked with one of the philosophy professors at USC about it. I told Dr. Young that this is another ploy to work toward ultimate control of Pepperdine without the restraining hand of Dr. Young. I think it is true that Bill is having trouble deciding what he believes and what he wishes to do with his life, but I also think it is true that he will never be satisfied until he also controls everything on earth and at least shares God's authority to rule the universe. This is not intended as an indication that I do not like Bill. I do. I am forever grateful for the confidence he has reposed in me and the opportunities he has given me to do what I am doing.
>
>Bill has constantly sought to add non-church members to our board of trustees. (The [[University Board]] has no legal authority, but is very influential. So far as I know, its members are generally happy to serve on that board. They like the honor of saying they are board members, without the burden of real responsibility). Dr. Young has always sought to retain the present arrangement since it was made. On April 14, the Board of Trustees met and elected 7 new members. This was done in large measure because of the criticisms made by [[Ira Rice]], [[Doyle Swain]] etc. to the effect that [[M. Norvel Young|Norvel]] ran everything, along with Bill of course, even to stacking the Board (which is of course true, and from many points of view desirable, for most of the board could not administer themselves out of paper sacks, though they are fine people). But in view of the [[Trent Devenney affair|scandal]] alleged to surround payments of money to Norvel and Bill as "[[University Planning Consultants]]" with the resultant criticism from the office of the Attorney General, Norvel and Bill saw the need to have new or additional board members, and to Norvel's credit he saw to it that they are all members of the church. [[Jack Scott]] was included to appease Bill. Jack does not wish to sever his connection with the church and wishes Pepperdine to maintain its connection, but is extremely liberal in what he will permit. Yet something of his real allegiance may be seen in his sending his daughter to [[Abilene Christian University|Abilene Christian College]]. Others named were [[John D. Katch|John Katch]], [[Thomas G. Bost|Tom Bost]], [[Evelyn Clark]], [[D. Lloyd Nelson|Lloyd Nelson]], [[T.A. Rogers]], and [[Joe Barnett]]. At this writing I am not sure how many have accepted. Lloyd Nelso \[*sic*\] was reported to be hesitant since he is retiring from [[USC]] and thinks this would be regarded as disloyal to USC. I hope he declines. He is a man of excellent character, so far as I know, but with extremely liberal theological views, so I have heard. I do not really know him. I am especially pleased to have Tom Bost, John Katch, Evelyn Clark, T.A. Rogers and Joe Barnett. I think they can all be counted on to help us continue our present direction.
>
>At that meeting the Board also passed a resolution to approve the payments to University Consultants. A copy of the resolution is included among these papers.
>
>Yesterday [[David Reagan]] was here to consider a job with Pepperdine. Bill is eager to have him, and he will probably be offered the post of director of the [[Center for International Business]]. Norvel says we do not need him but he will agree for him to come to please Bill. I object to him because of what he wrote after a former visit to our campus, a copy of which is in these papers. He would try to change our direction. He is fuzzy-minded if he thinks he can do what he would like to do and maintain an identification with the Churches of Christ. He has obviously made a failure as a college president in Texas, for when he was here earlier he said he would not like any job here except mine or [[Jerry Hudson]]'s. Now he just wants a job. The plan is to try him in CIB and then make him Dean of [[Graziadio Business School|School of Business]] next year. I prefer a non-church member for that post rather than him, for non-members do not busy themselves trying to alienate us from Churches of Christ, whereas this man would.
