---
id: 202504301354
slug: white-to-file-1974-02-21
title: White to file, 1974-02-21
date: 1974-02-21
year: 1974
type: memo
authors:
  - Howard A. White
archiveReference: Church Relations Major Items Feb. 1974 file, Box 63, Howard A. White papers
collectionId: 202504281112
transcribedBy: Sam Perrin
transcriptionDate: 2024-10-08
lastUpdated: 2025-04-30
---
This is a memo to file, written by Pepperdine executive vice president [[Howard A. White]], dated February 21, 1974. In the memo, White recounts a faculty meeting at which president [[William S. Banowsky]] explained the [[University Planning Consultants]] to the faculty in an attempt to defuse the [[Trent Devenney affair]].

>February 21, 1974
>
>Yesterday [[Jerry Hudson]] and I had lunch together and he told me that [[William S. Banowsky|Bill Banowsky]] was planning to attend the faculty meeting we had called for the pirpose \[*sic*\] of discussing the forthcoming accreditation visit. [[Larry Hornbaker]] had called Jerry to say that Bill wanted to explain to the faculty the details of the [[University Planning Consultants]]. I told Jerry that as questionable as this matter was, it was legal and was authorized by the [[Board of Regents|Trustees]], and that it should be treated as a confidential matter. Of course Jerry already knew all that, but I reminded him that I thought it would be unwise to reveal to the faculty the total amount of compensation [[M. Norvel Young|Dr. Young]] and others received from this fund. (I strongly agree in principle with the faculty that it was unseemly for Dr. Young to be collecting substantial sums at the same time he was telling a badly underpaid faculty that there was no money for a salary increase during that year, 1973). (Yet I must add that when I consider all the hard work Dr. Young has done, his late hours, his fund-raising, I do not know any rule of equity that would deprive him of a generous payment for the energy he expended, for without his contributions the faculty would not even have had jobs). I asked Jerry to tell Larry that it would be a mistake for the President to appear at the meeting to explain University Planning Consultants, and Jerry later told me he had done so.
>
>Nevertheless, Bill and Larry arrived at the [[faculty meeting, 1974-02-20|faculty meeting]] while I was talking about accreditation, and after other matters were considered, he was introduced. He gave a lengthy but concise explanation of the University Planning Consultants. Following is a synopsis of what he said: Back in the mid 196's \[*sic*\] a student at Pepperdine, [[Trent Devenney|Trent Devenny]] \[*sic passim; recte:* Devenney\], espoused extreme conservative causes and became an ally of Vice President [[William J. Teague]], as opposed to the "liberal" element led by Dr. Howard White. Through the years Mr. Devenny \[*sic passim*\] deplored what he regarded as liberal tendencies at Pepperdine, and became acquainted with a Mr. [[Gordon Del Faro|Gordon Delferro]] (sp?), a conservative businessman who never came to the campus but who donated about $100 per month over a period of years. Mr. Delferro is a supporter of [[Ed Reinecke|Ed Reineke]] \[*sic passim; recte*: Reinecke\], presently a Republican candidate for governor, and Mr. Delferro was looking for a way to diminish the influence that Bill Banowsky is having in California politics that does not support Mr. Ed Reineke. Therefore Trent Devenny's allegations were welcomed. Further fuel was added to the fire by leaks from a [[Bill Robertson|former finance office employee]] who had been dismissed and who told Trent Devenny about [[University Planning Consultants]] and even furnished copies of payment records (the employee was Bill Robertson, although Bill B. did not name him in the meeting). These charges and many others were compiled and reams of material were sent to various supporters of Pepperdine. University Planning Consultants was the name of a fictitious corporation formed by the Trustees or their Finance Committee in 1966 in order to compensate Dr. Young and others for their extra work. The device was used due to the lack of confidentiality in the Finance Office. The Trustee Finance Committee made the payments retroactive and they averaged $15,000 per year from 1957, when Dr. Young began work at Pepperdine at $10,000 per year. The money at various times was shared by Dr. Young, Bill Teague, [[Charles Runnels]] and Bill Banowsky. Bill said he did not know of the fund until last summer (1973), but that it was all legal and ethical.
>
>Having given this summary, Bill then offered to answer questions but said that he would like to dispose of the matter once and for all in "[[Operation Candor|operation candor]]" either by questions from the floor or by personal conference in the near future. There were no questions of significance. It appeared outwardly that his remarks were fairly well received, but it is imppossible \[*sic*\] to know what the faculty really thought.
>
>Our faculty raised a question about our recent [[Tyler Ecology Award dinner]] and the fact that a school that does not approve drinking and dancing on campus was involved in an event that included both. Bill replied that he saw the inconsistency, that the [[Patrons of Pepperdine|Patrons]] had arranged it, and he had learned about it not too long before the event. He said we need a more consistent philosophy, that we have grown so large we can no longer be the simple school we used to be, but that he would certainly favor a more consistent approach. (I knew of course that what he really favors is a secularization of the school, which he has advocated in conversations with me for two or three years, although more recently he has claimed he wants a Christian but interdenominational school. He said all this in the faculty meeting in such a manner that it could be taken to mean that he did not really approve the Tyler dinner and would like to take a more religious stance, but that was not what he really wants to do).
>
>Another faculty member raised a question about Pepperdine so often being typed as a Republican institution. Bill admitted his own part in giving Pepperdine a partisan flavor, but declared that he was really trying to favor "hunchbacks" and others who are deprived, and that he wants to liberalize the Republican party's stance. He said he thinks Pepperdine is now mature enough to break loose from the former conservative source of support. (As much as I wish we could be more objective, I do not see any way to fund Pepperdine without continuous reliance on conservative businessmen).
>
>Now for a few of my own comments on the University Consultants and on Bill's general approach: His explanation was about as smooth as such a thing could have been, and it may be that it will result in little further discussion of the subject, but I doubt it. Every time the faculty feels it needs a raise, it will think about this. Bill's remarks may have helped him, but they certainly damaged Dr. Young. He did not ever say that the total amount of money under consideration was about $225,000, but probably [[Ken Perrin]], Professor of Mathematics, will figure it out and tell others. In discussing our philosophy, Bill said he would like to see us elevate the cross about \[*sic*\] the flag. He opposed \[*sic*\] having the cross on the tower, which admittedly is symbolic, but he has consistently opposed anything in the school that would elevate the cross. If he had said to the faculty what he said to Jerry Hudson and me last Friday, there would have been bedlam. Some would of course approve his approach, but in my opinion most of our faculty at Malibu would not wish to see us turn our backs on Churches of Christ. I have no way of proving that, but that is my strong opinion.
>
>All in all, Bill's performance was what one would expect from one who may run for high office: He mainly said what he thought his listeners wanted to hear, made self-serving remarks etc. I do not wish to accuse him of deliberately lying repeatedly, for he may have rationalized it all in his own mind. All I can say is that if I cam \[*sic*\] capable of seeing the truth, he did not tell it in this meeting.
